Rex Gryphus, Prelude to The Pu’Shing Bhu’Tons Series

     “Rex the Gryphus!” the people chanted, “transform for us!”
     For three days the protests raged. For three days Rex Gryphus paced his study wondering, how can I give them something that I can’t control? He contemplated the very core of his being, recalling his father’s words of wisdom, “the more frequently you transform, the better you’ll get at forcing the change.” In 30 years he’d only transformed twice. 
     The first time was a complete surprise. He’d been 11 years old. After sneaking out of the Templus de Ambros, he’d walked through the market square where he saw an old woman had been pushed over by a gang of eight teenagers. Although the market was filled with people, not one made an effort to help the old lady or to stop the gang from harassing her. Some looked down as they walked by, others looked up. His anger grew. When one of the gang stepped on the old lady’s arthritis-curled hand, in rage he ran through the square. He didn’t realize that he was transforming as he ran. By the time he reached the old lady the gang had fled. When he held out a hand to help her up, he saw a lion’s paw. The old woman refused to take it. She cowered before him, mumbling apologies. All activity in the market came to a standstill as vendors and shoppers alike stared in awe at the angry griffin prince. In sheer exasperation, he opened his mouth to holler and heard a high-pitched screech. The old woman crawled deeper into her shawl, the vendors and shoppers ducked behind booths, and Mercury’s Elite Guard stormed the market square. The confused griffin prince was surrounded by his father’s personal security team. As they led him back to Templus de Ambros, his form altered again. One kind Merc wrapped his cloak around the naked prince. His father did not yell when Rex was presented in just a Merc’s cloak, though the boy could tell it took his father a great deal of effort. 
     The second time was worse. At 24 years old, he joined the Poterit Don Regular Militia as an Ensign in order to learn regimentation and to better understand military procedures. How could one lead an army without understanding protocol? For six months he’d taken orders without question. He despised his 1st Lieutenant, an obstinate woman with a chip on her shoulder, who made it her personal mission to humiliate him. That fall a terrible storm devastated the lower region of Poterit Don, which was subsequently put under martial law with the Regular Militia sent to enforce it. Because more storms were expected, the Regulars were ordered to evacuate all residents to the emergency shelters north of the villages of Avalona and Ecirava. Having waited out hundreds of storms over the years, many of the older people refused to leave their family homes. Ensign Gryphus sympathized greatly with them, while his home was the Templus de Ambros and not a small cottage near the sea, he knew what it meant to have an ancestral home. 

     On Sea Road, in a small neighborhood development, there stood Darin Manor, the oldest house in the Ocean region of Poterit Don; or so the brown metal placard along the street claimed. 1st Lieutenant Macbar ordered Ensign Gryphus to lead a detachment into the house to force evacuation. The ensign immediately recognized the old woman who opened the door. 13 years had passed since he saw her attacked in the market square. She didn’t recognize him; after all, he’d been in griffin form when he tried to help her up. Before his team could push through the old lady, Ensign Gryphus threw up an arm to block the door.
     “Ma’am,” he spoke slowly, “we’re under orders to evacuate everyone from Ocean Region. You have to come with us.”
     “I’ll do no such thing,” she declared. “This is my house and no one is going to force me to leave it. I was born here and I’ll die here. Thank you very much. Have a nice day.” She started to push the door closed, but Ensign Gryphus stepped into the doorway. 
     “For your safety,” the ensign began again, “we’re under orders to evacuate all residents to the Emergency Shelter north of Avalona. Ma’am, you have to come.”
     “Just push through her, sir,” one of the privates suggested while laughing.
     Ensign Gryphus spun in the doorway and growled, “the first one of you that takes a step towards this door before you’re ordered to will have to face me.” It wasn’t his words that froze the detachment; it was the look in his eyes. Until that moment, they had all thought he was a joke. He turned back to the old woman, “please, come with us. After the storms pass you can return to your home.”
     “Mister, I don’t know who you think you are, but I tell you I’m not going anywhere. This house has withstood plenty of storms and it’ll withstand these, too. I’ve got my family and everything we need to last. Now, go. Leave us alone. There are plenty of others in this neighborhood who could use your help.” Once again she tried to push the door closed, this time Ensign Gryphus stepped out of her way.
     “Sir,” the private who’d laughed earlier said, “we’ve got orders. You can’t just let her stay.”
     “Private,” Ensign Gryphus replied, “I know what our orders say. I don’t need you to repeat them to me. Go read that placard. When you’re done, tell me how long this house has been here. Sergeant Caliber,” he ordered, “you and Private Foggy stand guard. No one is to touch that door until I come back.” 
     As he walked down the stairs the private called from the road, “sir! It says the Darin family’s been on the land for 200 years and that Darin Manor was built 20 years after they settled here. So, the house is about 180 years old.”
     “What does that mean to us, Private Silk?”
     “It doesn’t mean anything to me, sir. I mean, it’s an old house with an old lady. We got orders, so, who cares how long her family’s lived here?”
     “Private Silk,” the ensign shook his head in disbelief, “it means this house and family were here 86 years ago, when hurricane Justina demolished the coastline. Do you recall the tales of hurricane Justina? If this house survived that, it can survive anything. We’re not going to force these people out. I’m going to find 1st Lieutenant. You four stay here and guard this house. No one enters without the matron’s permission. You got that?”
     “Yes, sir!” the four Regulars chimed in unison. 
     Rex Gryphus ran for five minutes to reach the rendezvous point just north of the Sea Road neighborhood. When he got there he saw six other detachments loading residents into long haul wagons. Most were orderly, a few were cussing loudly, while a handful were fighting with the soldiers. 1st Lieutenant Macbar was missing. 
     “Soldier,” the ensign called out to a Regular helping children into one of the wagons, “where’s 1st Lieutenant?”
     “She went looking for some ensign,” the woman answered. “She was pissed. Said he should have been here by now. Say, Ensign, are you the one?”
     He didn’t bother to answer, instead, he about-faced and took off for Darin Manor. He made it back in four minutes. When he got there he found his detachment under armed guard, saw troops moving in and out of the house, and heard the old woman scream. 
     The ensign charged into the yard yelling, “what is going on?”
     “They took us by surprise, sir,” Private Silk hollered, for his effort he was pushed against the wall.
     A second scream came from inside the house, Ensign Gryphus took the stairs two at a time. When he barged into the house, he was shocked at what he saw. 1st Lieutenant Macbar was in a standoff with the old lady. The lieutenant pointed her militia issued pistol at the old lady who held an ancient shotgun. Both were screaming.
     “Lieutenant,” the ensign bellowed, “put your gun down and get out of this house. NOW!”
     The lieutenant turned her head slightly, “ensign, I’ll have you brought up on charges for disobeying a direct order. This house was supposed to be cleared before I got here. Your men drew their weapons. You’ll all be court-martialed.”
     Ensign Gryphus couldn’t stop his anger from boiling over. Each word she spoke grated on his every nerve. Before he could stop himself, he lunged for the lieutenant’s gun. As he lunged, he began to transform. His body elongated, fur erupted, feathers poked out, a tail sprouted. He pinned Macbar to the ground, his great lion’s paws on her chest, and her gun just out of reach. A loud explosion rocked the griffin prince. The shotgun went off when the old lady fell trying to get out of the griffin’s way. The soldiers outside came running into the house. When they saw the griffin standing on the lieutenant, they froze. In the confusion, the ensign’s detachment confiscated the guns from their guards, then ran into the house where they too stood frozen. Everyone in the kingdom knew the king’s family could change into griffins, though few outside the Templus de Ambros had ever actually seen it. 
     Everything had happened so fast, whereas the inquiries took months. Darin Manor withstood the storms. Although the old Darin woman and her family were forced to evacuate they were later allowed to return. Ensign Gryphus and 1st Lieutenant Macbar were both court-martialed, their troops were completely exonerated. When all was said and done, Ensign Gryphus chose to resign his commission while 1st Lieutenant Macbar was reduced in rank and sent off to the nether regions of Poterit Don. Rex Gryphus returned to Templus de Ambros disillusioned and intent on finding new work to occupy his time. He took up gardening and spending mornings in the Great Library. He vowed to never transform again, not that he had control over it.  

     Faith Gryphus watched her husband pacing in the study. First, he passed the window overlooking the Gryphon Gardens, followed by the stack of open books on his desk, then to the bookshelves, and back to the window. She watched him for five solid minutes without speaking. He never saw her, he just paced and paced. Finally, she said, “my love, we have to do something. The protests are growing worse.”
     “Wha–?” he looked at her as if seeing her for the first time, “what?”
     “Rex, you cannot go on like this. Invite their envoy in. Hear them out. Concede to some of their demands.”
     “Dear heart, you do not understand. They only want one thing. Proof that I am capable of becoming a griffin. They want me to stand on the balcony, wave my arms about, then to fly off into the sunset. I can’t do it. I won’t do it.”
     “Can’t or won’t? These are very different things.”
     “Last year, before father passed away, he told me, ‘the people grant us power because we are something they are not. We protect them. Sometimes from themselves, but mostly from those who would attack us. Rule firmly, but justly.’ I’ve been just. I haven’t been firm. That is why they protest. They think I’m a pushover. I’ve been here before,” he looked her in the eyes, “Faith, there’s no way that I’ll cave to their demands. I’ll change into a griffin only when needs must.”
     “I hate to say it, my love,” Faith Gryphus took her husband’s hand, “if these protests get any worse, needs must.”
     He looked out the window, beyond the Gryphon Gardens, back to the day he vowed never to change again. The griffin king pondered his abilities, could he even change? Without realizing it, he dropped his wife’s hand and resumed pacing. She waited a moment, hoping he might return to her. When he didn’t she left him to his pacing.
     Two hours later, a scream startled him back to reality. He ran out of his study into the main passage, where he saw broken glass. He heard another scream and ran towards the sitting rooms. He noticed more broken glass and a handful of protestors. Then he saw masked men hauling off the queen. She fought valiantly, though the men were stronger. He darted after them, unconscious of his transformation. When he reached the double doors leading out of the sitting rooms he looked about but could not see the men or his wife. The entryway was crawling with protestors and Mercury’s Elite Guards. When the protestors saw the king in griffin form they balked, bent heads, and slowly backed out of the entryway. The Merc’s continued pushing the protestors out, though even they paused to stare. 
     Rex Gryphus pushed through the ruckus in the hall, passed up the Merc’s and the protestors in the entryway, and out onto the steps in front of the Templus de Ambros. He spread out his big black wings, planted his four giant lion’s paws, and let out a terrifying screech. In that moment, windows across the temple shattered. Children cried out. Protestors and non-protesters stopped in their tracks. The griffin king stretched and beat his wings until he was airborne. 
     For hours he circled the city of Ambrosia searching for any sign of his wife. It was all for naught. As the light began to fade, he returned to the Templus de Ambros. The protestors had dispersed and the guards were on high-alert. The groundskeepers had fixed some of the damage by putting up wood planks; new windows would have to be made. The despairing king descended into the Gryphon Gardens. He thought to walk and to think. He’d never flown before, his back muscles were cramped. He had no idea how to return to human form and no idea who had stolen his wife. 
     While in the gardens he heard three voices on the wind. Curious, he followed the sound into a small alcove behind the rock garden. Through the bushes he could see two of the three. Both wore hooded cloaks. They were standing under the monument of his great grandfather, the Sage Gryphon King. When he was close enough he could hear their words.
     “I can’t believe it worked,” one man said.
     “I told you that it would,” the second said.
     “Fintan, we must never tell him,” the woman spoke softly, he recognized her voice immediately, “if he finds out, he’ll be humiliated. I just didn’t know what else to do.”
     Rex Gryphus waited behind a bush, shocked to hear his wife talking to two men. He tried to calm himself, to wait, and listen. He failed. Using his lion’s paws, he shoved through the bushes into the alcove and charged. Seeing only one man, he attacked Fintan. His sudden appearance startled them. Faith, stepped back, tripped on the hem of her cloak, and smacked her head against the Sage Gryphon’s monument. She fell in a heap on the ground while Rex attacked Fintan. The griffin king’s claw pierced Fintan’s eye, a falcon which had been perched on the statue attacked the griffin who backed away as a naked man. While the nude king knelt over his wife, the falcon ate Fintan’s eye. 
     “Faith?” Rex begged, though she did not move, “Faith, please.”
     “You fool,” Fintan called, “look what you’ve done. We were only trying to help you.”
     “Fool,” the falcon chimed.
     “Who are you? What have you done to her?”
     “I’m her brother, Fintan, a bard. Is she—dead?”
     “I—I think so,” Rex moaned.
     Though blood poured from his left eye, Fintan crawled over to his sister, and cried out, “oh, Faith! Curse you, you idiot king!” the bleeding bard yelled, “she wanted to save you and your kingdom. You killed her.”
     The naked king stood up. He had to go. He couldn’t be there. Not with her like that. They needed help. He had to get someone who could help. She wasn’t dead. She couldn’t be dead. He rushed through the gardens headed towards the hospital. The doctor. He had to get the doctor. It took ten minutes for him to reach the hospital and explain what happened. Everyone was so worried about his nudity, they ignored his pleas. Finally, wrapped in a doctor’s smock, he, the doctor, and a crew of two carrying a gurney made it back to the Sage Gryphon’s monument. Faith lay where she had fallen. The bard lay unconscious next to her. The falcon was once again perched on the statue. 
     “There’s nothing we can do for her, my liege,” the doctor confessed. 
     Rex Gryphus lost his mind. He screamed, yelled, and cried out in vain. In a fit, he disappeared into the palace. For days afterwards the sounds of his sorrow filled the city of Ambrosia. Sometimes it was the sound of a man, sometimes the sound of an eagle. Always the people felt shame, recognizing their own guilt with every cry and caw.  


  
